First shot at a unified proposal (#103)
quicwg/multipath: draft-ietf-quic-multipath.md

requires negotiation between the two endpoints using a new transport
parameter, as specified in {{nego}}.

The proposal introduces support for multiple packet number spaces.
When multipath is negotiated,
each destination connection ID is linked to a separate packet number space.
Using multiple packet number spaces enables direct use of the
loss recovery and congestion control mechanisms defined in
{{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

> Some deployments of QUIC use zero-length connection ID.

Reviewer: RFC9000 says the following:

```
  An endpoint SHOULD NOT initiate migration with a peer that has
   requested a zero-length connection ID, because traffic over the new
   path might be trivially linkable to traffic over the old one.
```

I wonder if the above behavior has implications on maintaining multiple paths when  zero-length connection IDs are in used.

> Some deployments of QUIC use zero-length connection ID.

Author: The RFC 9000 text suggests that only the node that is choosing to use zero length CID will initiate a new path -- typically a client. That seems fine. Third parties will be able to observe packets flowing between client and server as follow:

* path 1: between address 1 and port 1 on client, and server address and server port on server.
* path 2: between address 2 and port 2 on client, and server address and server port on server.

The addresses and ports will be visible whether the client uses null-length CID or not. We may want to say to point out that using different port numbers for each path may remove 16 bits of possible correlation data, but that applies to RFC 9000 just as well.

> Some deployments of QUIC use zero-length connection ID.

Reviewer: I agree this is OK in typical scenarios. 

I leave it up to you to decide if it is worth to include a mention about this in the draft. Thanks, @huitema.

When a node elects to use zero-length connection IDs, it is not
possible to use different connections IDs for distinguishing packets

> sent to that node over different paths. All packets sent to a NULL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sent to that node over different paths. All packets sent to a zero-length
```

CID are numbered in the same number space. Out of order delivery is likely,
which causes inflation of the number of acknowledgement ranges and of the
the size of ACK frames. This proposal specifies algorithms for
controlling the size of acknowledgement packets. Senders that accept to

> use multiple paths when sending to a node using NULL length CID will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use multiple paths when sending to a node using zero-length CID will
```

have to use special logic to minimize the impact of multipath

> delivery on loss detection and congestion controls. If the receiver

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
delivery on loss detection and congestion controller. If the receiver
```

Author: This is outdated.

> reports ECN counters, they will contain the sum of marks received on all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reports ECN counters, they will contain the sum of markings received on all
```

> paths. Senders will need specific logic to handle such ECN marks.

Reviewer: Again, the "specific" thing is worth be exemplified.

requires negotiation between the two endpoints using a new transport
parameter, as specified in {{nego}}.

This extension uses multiple packet number spaces.
When multipath is negotiated,
each destination connection ID is linked to a separate packet number space.
Using multiple packet number spaces enables direct use of the
loss recovery and congestion control mechanisms defined in
{{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

Some deployments of QUIC use zero-length connection IDs.
When a node selects to use zero-length connection IDs, it is not
possible to use different connection IDs for distinguishing packets
sent to that node over different paths. All packets sent with a zero-length
CID are numbered in the same number space. When using the same packet number space

> on multiple paths, out of order delivery is likely. This causes inflation of the number of 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on multiple paths, out of order delivery is likely. This causes inflation of the number of
```

acknowledgement ranges and therefore of the
the size of ACK frames. Senders that accept to use a single number
space on multiple paths when sending to a node using zero-length CID need
to take special care to minimize the impact of multipath

> delivery on loss detection, congestion control, and ECN handling. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
delivery on loss detection, congestion control, and ECN handling.
```

requires negotiation between the two endpoints using a new transport
parameter, as specified in {{nego}}.

This extension uses multiple packet number spaces.
When multipath is negotiated,
each destination connection ID is linked to a separate packet number space.
Using multiple packet number spaces enables direct use of the
loss recovery and congestion control mechanisms defined in
{{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

Some deployments of QUIC use zero-length connection IDs.
When a node selects to use zero-length connection IDs, it is not
possible to use different connection IDs for distinguishing packets
sent to that node over different paths. This extension also specifies a way to use

> zero-length CID by using the same packet number space on all paths. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
zero-length CID by using the same packet number space on all paths.
```

which causes inflation of the number of acknowledgement ranges and of the

> the size of ACK frames. This proposal specifies algorithms forf{#

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the size of ACK frames. This proposal specifies algorithms for
```

controlling the size of acknowledgement packets. Senders that accept to
use multiple paths when sending to a node using zero-length CID will
have to use special logic to minimize the impact of multipath
delivery on loss detection and congestion control. If the receiver
reports ECN counters, they will contain the sum of markings received on all
paths. Senders will need specific logic to handle such ECN marks.
(The logic required to support zero-length CID at receivers and senders
is discussed in {{using-zero-length}}.)

> 

Author: This lines were added to address review by @boucadair

additional path MUST first initiate the Address Validation procedure
with PATH_CHALLENGE and PATH_RESPONSE frames described in
{{Section 8 of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. After receiving packets from the

> client on the new paths, the servers MUST in turn attempt to validate

Reviewer 2: This seems more related to the discussion in #101, not sure if it should be part of this PR.

Author: Reverted.

negotiation is ambiguous, they MUST be interpreted as acknowledging
packets sent on path 0.

## Using Zero-Length connection ID {#using-zero-length}

> If a node elects to use zero-length connection IDs, it MUST implement the
> handling of Acknowledgements defined in {{sending-acknowledgements-and-handling-ranges}}.
> The peer node using zero-length connection IDs SHOULD implement a
> logic to handle loss detection in the presence of multiple paths,
> identify the path on which packets are acknowledged or determined
> lost for the purpose of congestion control as explained
> in {{zero-length-cid-loss-and-congestion}}, mitigate the ECN
> issues mentioned in {{ecn-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}}, and
> mitigate the RTT measurement issues explained
> in {{ack-delay-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}}. If a node
> does not support this logic, it MUST limit its use of multipath
> as explained in {{restricted-sending-to-zero-length-cid-peer}}.

Reviewer 3: I don't think the MUST and SHOULD here make a lot of sense, given there are more/other normative language later in this section. Also ice think your removed too much.... here is an alternative proposal for this section intro part:
```suggestion
If a zero-length connection ID is used, one packet number space
 for all paths. That means the packet sequence numbers are allocated from the common
 number space, so that, for example, packet number N could be sent
 on one path and packet number N+1 on another.
 
 In this case, ACK frames report the numbers of packets that have been received so far,
 regardless of the path on which they have been received. That means
 the senders needs to maintain an association between sent packet numbers
 and the path over which these packets were sent. This is necessary
 to implement per path congestion control, as explained
in {{zero-length-cid-loss-and-congestion}}.

Further, the receiver of packets with zero-length connection IDs should
handling of acknowledgements defined in {{sending-acknowledgements-and-handling-ranges}}.

ECN handing is discussed in {{ecn-handling}}, and
mitigation of the RTT measurement is further explained
in {{ack-delay-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}}. 

If a node
does not support this logic, it MUST limit its use of multipath
as explained in {{restricted-sending-to-zero-length-cid-peer}}.
```

### Sending Acknowledgements and Handling Ranges

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

If zero-length CID and therefore also a single packet number space
is used by the sender, the receiver MAY send ACK frames instead
of MP-ACK frames to reduce overhead as the additional path ID field
will anyway always carry the same value.

```

   uses a series of consecutive sequence numbers without creating
   holes.

> ### NULL-CID-Loss-and-Congestion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Congestion Control, Loss Recovery and NULL CID Considerations
```

Author: Let's first apply @mirjak's suggestion to replace NULL by zero-length...

Author: The new title is "Loss and Congestion Handling With Zero-Length CID". I hope it works.

> Implementations MUST implement per-path congestion control. Congestion

Reviewer 2: I don't think per-path congestion control is specific to NULL CID case.

Author: Correct. Need to state that correctly. The point is, in the absence of CID, implementations must track the path over which the packet loss or the RTT measurement occurred, because the number space is shared.

Author: Fixed, per next comment.

control regulates the amount of data in flight and the pacing of packets
using estimates of path characteristics. The estimates can use a variety
of signals, such as packet acknowledgements, loss detection, or measurements
of round trip time. These events MUST be attributed to the path over

> which the corresponding packets were sent. When sending to a NULL CID

Reviewer 2: Actually, the beginning of this paragraph is not specific to the NULL CID case.

Author: Yes.

Author: Fixed.

receiver, senders will receive back acknowledgements that combine packet
numbers received over multiple paths. Senders MUST be able to infer the
sending path from the acknowledged packet numbers, for example by remembering

> which packet was sent to what path. The MUST use that information to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which packet was sent to what path. The senders MUST use that information to
```

> which packet was sent to what path. The MUST use that information to

Author: Fixed

   uses a series of consecutive sequence numbers without creating
   holes.

### Loss and Congestion Handling With Zero-Length CID {#zero-length-cid-loss-and-congestion}

When sending to a zero-length CID
receiver, senders will receive back acknowledgements that combine packet
numbers received over multiple paths. Senders MUST be able to infer the
sending path from the acknowledged packet numbers, for example by remembering
which packet was sent on what path. The senders MUST use that information to
perform congestion control on the relevant paths, and to correctly
estimate the transmission delays on each path. (See
{{ack-delay-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}} for specific considerations
about using the ACK Delay field of ACK frames, and
{{ecn-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}} for issues on using ECN marks.)

Loss detection as specified in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}} uses algorithms

> based on timers and on sequence numbers. When sending to zero-length CID receivers,
> senders expect that packets sent on different paths will not be received in
> order. They cannot directly use the packet sequence numbers to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
based on timers and on sequence numbers. When packets are sent over multiple paths,
loss detection must be adapted to allow for different RTTs on different paths.
When sending to zero-length CID receivers, packets sent on different paths may not be received in
order. Therefore senders cannot directly use the packet sequence numbers to
```

compute the Packet Thresholds defined in {{Section 6.1.1 of QUIC-RECOVERY}}.
Relying only on Time Thresholds produces correct results, but is somewhat
suboptimal. Some implementations have been getting good results by
remembering not just the path over which a packet was sent, but also
the order of a packet on that path. They can then use this order in the

> Packet Threshold tests.

Reviewer 3: I don't think I fully understand these last couple of sentences. Can you clarify?

Author: Fixed.

   uses a series of consecutive sequence numbers without creating
   holes.

### Loss and Congestion Handling With Zero-Length CID {#zero-length-cid-loss-and-congestion}

When sending to a zero-length CID
receiver, senders may receive acknowledgements that combine packet
numbers received over multiple paths. 
However, even if one packet number space is used on multiple path
the sender MUST maintain separate congestion control state for each
path. Therefore, senders MUST be able to infer the
sending path from the acknowledged packet numbers, for example by remembering
which packet was sent on what path. The senders MUST use that information to
perform congestion control on the relevant paths, and to correctly
estimate the transmission delays on each path. (See
{{ack-delay-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}} for specific considerations
about using the ACK Delay field of ACK frames, and

> {{ecn-and-zero-length-cid-considerations}} for issues on using ECN marks.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{ecn-handling}} for issues on using ECN marks.)
```

Loss detection as specified in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}} uses algorithms
based on timers and on sequence numbers. When packets are sent over
multiple paths, loss detection must be adapted to allow for different RTTs
on different paths. When sending to zero-length CID receivers, packets sent

> on different paths may not be received in order. Therefore senders cannot

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on different paths may be received out of order. Therefore senders cannot
```

as described in {{QUIC-Timestamp}}.

### ECN and Zero-Length CID Considerations

ECN feedback in QUIC is provided based on counters in the ACK frame
(see {{Section  19.3.2. of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}). These counters are specific
to a number space. When sending to zero-length CID receivers, the same number space is
used for multiple paths, and the ECN feedback cannot unambiguously be assigned to
a path.

If the sender marks its packets with the ECN capable flags, the network
will expect standard reactions to ECN marks, such as slowing down
transmission on the sending path. As the sending path is ambiguous,
the sender must treat a CE marking as a congestion signal on all sending
paths.

A host that is sending over multiple paths to a zero-length CID receiver
MAY disable ECN marking and
send all subsequent packets as Not-ECN capable.

### Restricted Sending to Zero-Length CID Peer

Hosts that are designed to support multipath using multiple number spaces
MAY adopt a conservative posture after negotiating multipath support with
a peer using zero-length CID. The simplest posture is to elect to only send
data on one path at a time, while accepting packets on all acceptable

> paths. In that case:

Reviewer 2: That is what I understand from the current text, yes.

> paths. In that case:

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's the meaning. For me the text is clear. I will merge the PR now, however, if you think further clarification is needed please propose a separate PR.

To collect ACK delays on all the paths, hosts should rely on time stamps

> as described in {{QUIC-Timestamp}}.

Reviewer 2: Maybe should we create an issue referencing this and create a specific PR afterwards?

> as described in {{QUIC-Timestamp}}.

Reviewer 3: Created issue #125

> ### ECN and Zero-Length CID Considerations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### ECN and Zero-Length CID Considerations {#ecn-handing}
```

> ECN feedback in QUIC is provided based on counters in the ACK frame
> (see {{Section  19.3.2. of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}). These counters are specific
> to a number space. When sending to zero-length CID receivers, the same number space is
> used for multiple paths, and the ECN feedback cannot unambiguously be assigned to
> a path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ECN feedback in QUIC is provided based on counters in the ACK frame
(see {{Section  19.3.2. of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}). That means if an ACK
 frame acknowledges multiple packets, the ECN feedback cannot be accounted
 to a specific packet.

There are separate counters for each packet number space. However, sending to zero-length CID receivers, the same number space is used for multiple paths. Respectively, if an ACK frames acknowledges multiple
packets from different paths, the ECN feedback cannot unambiguously be assigned to
a path.
```

If the sender marks its packets with the ECN capable flags, the network
will expect standard reactions to ECN marks, such as slowing down

> transmission on the sending path. As the sending path is ambiguous,
> the sender must treat a CE marking as a congestion signal on all sending
> paths.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transmission on the sending path. If zero-length CID is used, 
the sending path is however ambiguous. Therefore, the sender MUST
treat a CE marking as a congestion signal on all sending paths.
```

Reviewer 3: Note that this change is not only editorial as I added the clause that you only MUST decrease those paths where you actually got a packet acknowledged. This is slightly more complicated but you should have saved the information where which packet was sent anyway and this allows for optimisation in the ACK creation. Given this is a MUST, I think we need this clause.

A host that is sending over multiple paths to a zero-length CID receiver
MAY disable ECN marking and
send all subsequent packets as Not-ECN capable.

### Restricted Sending to Zero-Length CID Peer

Hosts that are designed to support multipath using multiple number spaces
MAY adopt a conservative posture after negotiating multipath support with

> a peer using zero-length CID. The simplest posture is to elect to only send

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a peer using zero-length CID. The simplest posture is to only send
```

data on one path at a time, while accepting packets on all acceptable
paths. In that case:

* the attribution of packets to path discussed in {{zero-length-cid-loss-and-congestion}}
  are easy to solve because packets are sent on a single path,
* the ACK Delays are correct,

> * the vast majority of ECN marks relate to the current sending path.

Author: There is always the occasional probe, etc.

Of course, the hosts will only take limited advantage from the multipath
capability in these scenarios. Support for "make before break" migrations
will improve, but load sharing between multiple paths will not work.

> ## Using Multiple Packet Number Spaces
> 
> If the multipath option is enabled with a value of 2, each path has

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Using non-zero length CID and Multiple Packet Number Spaces

If packets contain a non-zero CID, each path has
```

To collect ACK delays on all the paths, hosts should rely on time stamps
as described in {{QUIC-Timestamp}}.

### ECN and NULL CID Considerations

ECN feedback in QUIC is provided based on counters in the ACK frame
(see {{Section  19.3.2. of QUIC-TRANSPORT}}). These counters are specific

> to a number space. When sending to NULL CID receivers, teh same number space is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to a number space. When sending to NULL CID receivers, the same number space is
```

used for multiple paths, and the ECN feedback cannot unambiguously be assigned to
a path.

If the sender marks its packets with the ECN capable flags, the network
will expect standard reactions to ECN marks, such as slowing down
transmission on the sending path. As the sending path is ambiguous,
the sender must treat a CE marking as a congestion signal on all sending
paths.

A host that is sending over multiple paths to a NULL CID receiver
MAY disable ECN marking and
send all subsequent packets as Not-ECN capable.

### Restricted Sending to NULL CID Peer

Hosts that are designed to support multipath using multiple number spaces
MAY adopt a conservative posture after negotiating multipath support with
a peer using NULL CID. The simplest posture is to elect to only send
data on one path at a time, while accepting packets on all acceptable
paths. In that case:

* the attribution of packets to path discussed in {{null-cid-loss-and-congestion}}
  are easy to solve because packets are sent on a single path,

> * the ACK Delays are mostly correct,

Reviewer 2: why "mostly"?

Author: :-)
need to find another way of saying that without a number space per path this is harder to get right.

Author: Removed "mostly"
